Yes, your concern is valid — using Service Control Policies (SCPs) to restrict EC2 instance launch based on specific AMIs can interfere with backup and restore processes, depending on how your backup solution works.

Here's why:
Most backup/restore tools (e.g., AWS Backup, custom Lambda, or third-party tools like Veeam, Druva, etc.) create and restore AMIs under the hood, or launch new EC2 instances from AMIs during restore. If you block AMI usage broadly via SCP, you may inadvertently block:

Restoring EC2 instances from backup

Launching temporary instances for backup validation or testing

Copying AMIs across regions or accounts

Examples of potential breakage:
AWS Backup Restore Failure
If your SCP restricts launching EC2 instances to only specific AMI IDs, then restore operations (which create a temporary instance using the backed-up AMI) may be denied.

AMI Copy Permissions
If part of your backup flow involves cross-region or cross-account copying of AMIs, and SCPs restrict ec2:CopyImage or ec2:RunInstances for certain AMIs, the backup job might fail.

Lambda or Automation Workflows
If you have automation that uses AMIs dynamically (like a golden image pipeline), that automation could break if SCPs block certain AMIs.

Recommended Approach
Instead of directly blocking all non-approved AMIs at the SCP level (which affects the whole org/unit), consider:

✅ Option 1: Use IAM Conditions (Better Granularity)
Use IAM policies on specific roles/users that only allow launching from approved AMIs, but exempt backup/restore roles.

json
Copy
Edit
{
  "Effect": "Deny",
  "Action": "ec2:RunInstances",
  "Resource": "*",
  "Condition": {
    "StringNotEquals": {
      "ec2:ImageId": [
        "ami-12345678", "ami-87654321"
      ]
    }
  }
}
Add exceptions using IAM principal tags or conditions.

✅ Option 2: Tag-Based Controls
Use resource tags and condition keys like aws:ResourceTag/ApprovedForLaunch: true.

✅ Option 3: SCP with Exception Paths
If you must use SCPs, ensure backup-related roles/accounts/OUs are excluded, like:

json
Copy
Edit
{
  "Effect": "Deny",
  "Action": "ec2:RunInstances",
  "Resource": "*",
  "Condition": {
    "StringNotEquals": {
      "ec2:ImageId": [
        "ami-allowed-1", "ami-allowed-2"
      ]
    },
    "ArnNotLike": {
      "aws:PrincipalArn": "arn:aws:iam::*:role/AWSBackup*"
    }
  }
}
Conclusion:
Yes — a strict SCP restricting AMI use can block restore operations, especially if the backup system launches from a different AMI than the one allowed.
Instead, prefer fine-grained IAM policies or tag-based controls, and explicitly exempt backup-related roles or services if you must use SCP.

Would you like help drafting such an SCP or IAM policy with safe exceptions?








You said:
Any other concerns you see with implementing SCP for AMI restriction?


ChatGPT said:
Yes, beyond just backup/restore, restricting AMI usage via SCP can have several unintended side effects. Here are the broader concerns and edge cases you should be aware of before implementing such SCPs:

🔸 1. Impact on Auto Scaling Groups (ASGs) and Launch Templates
ASGs and Launch Templates/Configurations use AMI IDs.

If you update a launch template with a non-whitelisted AMI, or if the AMI is copied across regions/accounts, the SCP might block new instance launches.

This can lead to failed scaling events or replacement of unhealthy instances failing silently.

🔧 Mitigation: Ensure all AMIs referenced by Launch Templates/ASGs are pre-approved.

🔸 2. Cross-Region/Account AMI Usage
SCPs don’t inherently distinguish intent — they simply enforce a blanket policy.

If AMIs are copied to other regions/accounts, but the copied AMIs get new IDs, they may not be included in the SCP allow list.

This breaks DR/HA scenarios using replicated AMIs.

🔧 Mitigation: Use AMI tags or naming patterns as a basis for control instead of static AMI IDs.

🔸 3. Image Builder Pipelines / Golden AMI Workflows
If you use EC2 Image Builder, or automation to bake golden AMIs:

The SCP might prevent those instances from launching unless their AMIs are explicitly pre-approved.

But the AMI is only created during the pipeline, so it's a chicken-and-egg problem.

🔧 Mitigation: Exclude the pipeline's execution roles from the SCP restrictions.

🔸 4. Third-Party Tools / Marketplace AMIs
Any solution that deploys instances from Marketplace (e.g., firewalls, logging appliances, or management tools) might be blocked if their AMIs aren’t whitelisted.

You might also prevent launching from EC2 Quick Start templates, Terraform, or CloudFormation templates referencing public AMIs.

🔧 Mitigation: Maintain a curated list of acceptable Marketplace/public AMIs, or allow by tag.

🔸 5. EC2 Instance Refresh or Reboot Automation
Rehydration workflows, where instances are terminated and replaced (e.g., as part of compliance or patching) may fail.

Reboot-based updates may rely on launching from the same AMI or a newly created patched AMI.

🔧 Mitigation: Ensure automation roles and AMIs used in those workflows are allowed.

🔸 6. Limited Visibility into SCP Denials
SCP denials can be hard to diagnose, especially if users only see AccessDenied without clear reason.

AWS CloudTrail doesn’t provide direct logs for SCP denial (since SCPs aren’t attached to users, but to accounts/OUs).

🔧 Mitigation:

Use aws:RequestTag and aws:PrincipalArn conditions to limit scope.

Document SCP implications clearly for all teams.

🔸 7. Hardcoding AMI IDs is Fragile
AMIs are region-specific and get rotated regularly.

You’ll need to update SCPs constantly if they rely on hardcoded AMI IDs.

🔧 Alternatives:

Use AMI tags ("Environment": "Approved") and check with ec2:ResourceTag/*.

Or use naming patterns via ec2:ImageName.

Summary of Safer Alternatives to Consider
Concern	SCP Risk	Alternative
Backup/Restore	Restore failures	Exempt backup roles
Golden AMI Pipeline	Instance launch failure	Allow pipeline roles
ASG/Launch Templates	Scaling breaks	Approve AMIs used
AMI Rotation	Frequent updates needed	Tag-based controls
Multi-region/DR	Copy failures	Dynamic allow via tags or shared IDs
Troubleshooting	Poor error visibility	IAM conditions with detailed logging

Would you like a sample SCP policy using AMI tags or ImageName conditions, instead of hardcoded IDs? That usually avoids most of the above pitfalls.
